After AT&T had dropped out of the Multics project, the Unix operating system was 
conceived and implemented by Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie (both of AT&T Bell
Laboratories) in 1969 and 1st released in 1970. Later they rewrote it in a new
programming language, C, to make it portable. The availability and portability 
of Unix caused it to be widely adopted, copied and modified by academic 
institutions and businesses.

In 1977, the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) was developed by the Computer 
Systems Research Group (CSRG) from UC Berkeley, based on the 6th edition of Unix
from AT&T. Since BSD contained Unix code that AT&T owned, AT&T filed a lawsuit
(USL v. BSDi) in the early 1990s against the University of California. This
strongly limited the development and adoption of BSD.

Onyx Systems began selling early microcomputer-based Unix workstations in 1980.
Later, Sun Microsystems, founded as a spin-off of a student project at Stanford
University, also began selling Unix-based desktop workstations in 1982. While Sun
workstations didn't utilize commodity PC hardware like Linux was later developed for,
it represented the 1st successful commercial attempt at distributing a primarily
single-user microcomputer that ran a Unix operating system.

In 1983, Richard Stallman started the GNU project with the goal of creating a free
UNIX-like operating system. As part of this work, he wrote the GNU General Public 
License (GPL). By the early 1990s, there was almost enough available software to 
create a full operating system. However, the GNU kernel, called Hurd, failed to 
attract enough development effort, leaving GNU incomplete.

In 1985, Intel released the 80386, the first x86 microprocessor with a 32-bit 
instruction set and a memory management unit with paging.

In 1986, Maurice J. Bach, of AT&T Bell Labs, published The Design of the UNIX Operating 
System. This definitive description principally covered the System V Release 2 kernel,
with some new features from Release 3 and BSD.

In 1987, MINIX, a Unix-like system intended for academic use, was released by Andrew 
S. Tanenbaum to exemplify the principles conveyed in his textbook, Operating Systems:
Design and Implementation. While source code for the system was available, 
modification and redistribution were restricted. In addition, MINIX's 16-bit design 
was not well adapted to the 32-bit features of the increasingly cheap and popular 
Intel 386 architecture for personal computers. In the early nineties a commercial 
UNIX operating system for Intel 386 PCs was too expensive for private users.

These factors and the lack of a widely adopted, free kernel provided the impetus for
Torvalds' starting his project. He has stated that if either the GNU Hurd or 386BSD 
kernels had been available at the time, he likely would not have written his own.